in his ( 1926) treatise on aphasia, and stresses how it is preserved,
and often enhanced, in aphasiacs. *
Thus the feeling I sometimes have-which all of us who work
closely with aphasiacs have-that one cannot lie to an aphasiac.
He cannot grasp your words, and so cannot be deceived by them;
but what he grasps he grasps with infallible precision, namely the
expression that goes with the words, that total, spontaneous, in-
voluntary expressiveness which can never be simulated or faked,
as words alone can, all too easily. ..
We recognise this with dogs, and often use them for this pur-
pose-to pick up falsehood, or malice, or equivocal intentions, to
tell us who can be trusted, who is integral, who makes sense, when
we-.so susceptible to words--cannot trust our own instincts.
And what dogs can do here, aphasiacs do too, and at a human
and immeasurably superior level. 'One can lie with the mouth,'
Nietzsche writes, 'but with the accompanying grimace one never-
theless tells the truth.' To such a grimace, to any falsity or impro-
priety in bodily appearance or posture, aphasiacs are preternatur-
ally sensitive. And if they cannot see one-this is especially true
of our blind aphasiacs-they have an infallible ear for every vocal
nuance, the tone, the rhythm, the cadences, the music, the sub-
tlest modulations, inflections, intonations, which can give-or re-
move-verisimilitude to or from a man's voice.
In this, then, lies their power of understanding-understanding,
without words, what is authentic or inauthentic. Thus it was the
grimaces, the histrionisms, the false gestures and, above all, the
false tones and cadences of the voice, which rang false for these
wordless but immensely sensitive patients. It was to these (for them)
most glaring, even grotesque, incongruities and improprieties that
.'Feeling-tone' is a favourite term of Head's, which he uses in regard not only to
aphasia but to the affective quality of sensation, as it may be altered by thalmic or
peripheral disorders. Our impression, indeed, is that Head is continually half-uncon-
sciously drawn towards the exploration of 'feeling-tone'-towards, so to speak, a neu-
rology of feeling-tone, in contrast or complementarity to a classical neurology of prop-
osition and process. It is, incidentally, a common term in the U.S.A., at least among
blacks in the South: a common, earthy and indispensable term. 'You see, there's such
a thing as a feeling tone. ..And if you don't have this, baby, you've had it' (cited by
Studs Terkel as epigraph to his 1967 oral history Division Street: America).
