my aphasic patients responded, undeceived and undeceivable by
words.
This is why they laughed at the President's speech.
If one cannot lie to an aphasiac, in view of his special sensitivity
to expression and 'tone', how is it, we might ask, with patients-
if there are such-who lack any sense of expression and 'tone',
while preserving, unchanged, their comprehension for words: pa-
tients of an exactly opposite kind? We have a number of such
patients, also on the aphasia ward, although, technically, they do
not have aphasia, but, instead, a form of agnosia, in particular a
so-called 'tonal' agnosia. For such patients, typically, the expres-
sive qualities of voices disappear-their tone, their timbre, their
feeling, their entire character-while words (and grammatical con-
structions) are perfectly understood. Such tonal agnosias (or 'apro-
sodias') are associated with disorders of the right temporal lobe of
the brain, whereas the aphasias go with disorders of the lert tem-
porallobe.
Among the patients with tonal agnosia on our aphasia ward
who also listened to the President's speech was Emily D. , with a
glioma in her right temporal lobe. A former English teacher, and
poetess of some repute, with an exceptional feeling for language,
and strong powers of analysis and expression, Emily D. was able
to articulate the opposite situation-how the President's speech
sounded to someone with tonal agnosia. Emily D. could no longer
tell if a voice was angry, cheerful, sad-whatever. Since voices
now lacked expression, she had to look at people's faces, their
postures and movements when they talked, and found herself doing
so with a care, an intensity , she had never shown before. But this,
it so happened, was also limited, because she had a malignant
glaucoma, and was rapidly losing her sight too.
What she then found she had to do was to pay extreme attention
to exactness of words and word use, and to insist that those around
her did just the same. She could less and less follow loose speech
or slang-speech of an allusive or emotional kind-and more and
more required of her interlocutors that they speak prose-'proper
