synthesiser) in order to reduce speech to pure words, speech totally
devoid of what Frege called 'tone-colour' (Klangenfarben) or 'evoc-
ation'. With the most sensitive patients, it was only with such a
grossly artificial, mechanical speech-somewhat like that of the
computers in Star Trek-that one could be wholly sure of their
aphasia.
Why all this? Because speech-natural speech--does not con-
sist of words alone, nor (as Hughlings Jackson thought) 'proposi-
tions' alone. It consists of utterance-an uttering-forth of one's
whole meaning with one's whole being-the understanding of which
involves infinitely more than mere word-recognition. And this was
the clue to aphasiacs' understanding, even when they might be
wholly uncomprehending of words as such. For though the words,
the verbal constructions, per se, might convey nothing, spoken
language is normally suffused with 'tone', embedded in an ex-
pressiveness which transcends the verbal-and it is precisely this
expressiveness, so deep, so various, so complex, so subtle, which
is perfectly preserved in aphasia, though understanding of words
be destroyed. Preserved-and often more: preternaturally en-
hanced ...
This too becomes clear-often in the most striking, or comic,
or dramatic way-to all those who work or live closely with aphas-
iacs: their families or friends or nurses or doctors. At first, perhaps,
we see nothing much the matter; and then we see that there has
been a great change, almost an inversion, in their understanding
of speech. Something has gone, has been devastated, it is true-
but something has come, in its stead, has been immensely en-
hanced, so that-at least with emotionally-laden utterance-the
meaning may be fully grasped even when every word is missed.
This, in our species Homo loquens, seems almost an inversion of
the usual order of things: an inversion, and perhaps a reversion
too, to something more primitive and elemental. And this perhaps
is why Hughlings Jackson compared aphasiacs to dogs (a compar-
ison that might outrage both!) though when he did this he was
chiefly thinking of their linguistic incompetences, rather than their
remarkable, and almost infallible, sensitivity to 'tone' and feeling.
Henry Head, more sensitive in this regard, speaks of 'feeling-tone'
